---
title: Computational Methods in Epidemic Simulation and Inference: Not-So-Great Models in Complex Situations
author: David Wu
---

Mechanistically-derived mathematical models have been a mainstay for understanding the dynamics of emerging epidemics. For these mathematical models to be of utility, it is often important for them to be calibrated with data. This is a statistically challenging process, often subject to poor identifiability and model misspecification; and a computationally expensive exercise, requiring repeated simulation of the underlying model. Here, we will examine a few aspects of these statistical and computational challenges, in the context of two case studies of recent epidemic outbreaks in New Zealand and Samoa. First, we will consider an existing collocation-based method as a way to sidestep the need to explicitly solve an ordinary differential equation model, that also indirectly allows for partially observed, potentially misspecified models. We recontextualise the method in a likelihood-based framework that then natively allows for uncertainty quantification and identifiability analysis with the profile likelihood and bootstrapping techniques. We apply this to a case of a measles outbreak in Samoa in 2019-2020, and show that this method yields accurate predictions. We next consider attacking misspecification directly, by considering efficient ways of simulating a large-scale discrete-event model in the context of COVID-19 in New Zealand. We develop a first-family variant of the Gillespie method that allows for non-Markovian behaviours through the use of delayed effects and thinning by rejection. Finally, we consider an approach of reducing the computational burden of inferring simulation models by using analogue ODE models as surrogates. We demonstrate how temporal registration and network effects need to be carefully considered in this framework, and show that this approach can reasonably recover the parameters for a synthetic dataset of a simple model.